No diphthong, no problem

“Glides only occur prevocalically in English” is a claim very often made by people teaching English phonology. There always are smart students who soon object: “what about lie or like, low or load?” It is not easy to convincingly argue that these words do not contain a word-final or a preconsonantal glide. Perhaps this is because they do.

According to a recent description, the vowel system of British English consists of three sets of vowels: short monophthongs, diphthongs, and long monophthongs. Each set contains five, six, or seven members, totalling 18 or 19 vowel types. In this paper my aim is to show that the vowel system of British English is way simpler than that, it consists of no more than six short vowels, i e a o u and ə. Anything beyond that, ie long vowels and diphthongs, are simply combinations of one of the six short vowels and a glide, ie a consonant. The analysis revives an unjustly forgotten idea, originally presented by Trager & Bloch (1941).

We will first get acquainted with the three sets of vowels Lindsey distinguishes, including a phonotactic justification for these sets (§1). This is followed by an examination of the diphthongs, whether it is indeed the case that the two parts of a diphthong are phonotactically dependent, and whether this would be relevant if it were true (§2). The next section (§3) looks at a curious phonotactic gap in English, namely, three glides, j w h, appear not to occur after a short stressed vowel. We will then look at epenthesis in English, which seems to treat diphthong+liquid sequences as consonant clusters (§4). Potential counterarguments against our proposal are listed in §5. The last but one section (§6) tentatively extends the analysis of diphthongs to long vowels. Conclusions end the paper (§7).

1 Three sets of vowels
We begin by introducing the three sets of vowels: short monophthongs (§1.1), diphthongs (§1.2), and long monophthongs (§1.3). As we will see these are not only phonetic categories, but — more importantly — phonological, ie phonotactic ones (§1.4). The vowel inventory of British English may be divided by the most general phonotactic patterns.
