
The original historical vowel is reconstructed as a ‘short A’, i.e., *a. At some point in the history of the language there appeared a phonological change that lengthened every *a before a voiceless fricative that was either word-final of followed by a consonant (= fricative in coda position), see (19a) in Accent 2. If the fricative was followed by a vowel (= fricative in onset) in the same word (but not across a #-boundary as in pass#ing), the lengthening failed, as in (19b(i)) (compare class ɑː to classify a). Lengthening also failed if the short vowel was followed by any other consonant (19b(ii)). We can blame this on a rule shown in (20). In Accent 1 nothing happened. 
(20) BATH-lengthening a   aː / __ Fric(−voi)#,  __Fric(−voi)C (voiceless fricatives: f θ s ʃ 
,303 
) 
The rule produced a segment (aː) that was an allophone of short a in Accent 2. This can be regarded as phonetic lengthening, something that stayed invisible to phonology (the language did not acquire a new phoneme as its occurrence was predictable, as shown by (20)). To complicate matters somewhat, it seems that this long aː developed into two qualitatively different vowels, aː and ɑː (there was no change affecting the short vowel, which stayed an open low short a) in the accents we show as 2.1 and 2.2 above. This qualitative change also remained invisible to phonology, a new phoneme did not come into existence.  
      However, there was another change underway that we will discuss at length later: R-deletion, which did result in a new phoneme being added to the system (cat kat vs cart kɑːt). Now there suddenly arose a minimal pair: the difference between cat and cart now hinged only on the difference in the two vowels.  
      The distribution of a and ɑː before voiceless fricatives, however, was still predictable at this stage (before coda fricatives there was a long low vowel, before onset fricatives it was a short low vowel). In other words, the existing phonemic opposition between short and long A was neutralised before coda fricatives (the vowel here could only be long: class) and before onset fricatives as well (the vowel here could only be short: classify). (You may remember other neutralisations in the language as well: s and ʃ are two phonemes of the language (sin vs shin), but before r only ʃ can occur (shrew, but not **srew), which allows us to say that the phonemic difference between s and ʃ before r is neutralised into ʃ.) 
 We have a bit of a conundrum here: how did the split happen? Why do we feel that this once allophonic/predictable difference between the vowels differentiates words now? It seems that what used to be complementary distribution at one stage ceased to be complementary at another due to analogy based on alternations involving the two vowels. The word class, for example, had two alternants: one with a short A (classify a) and one with a long A (class ɑː). It seems that complementary distribution ceased by the transference of the short vowel into the position which was originally occupied by the long vowel (mass a ‘quantity of matter’ now has a short vowel instead of a long one, influenced by massive a that has always had a short vowel). The same happened to math, which was influenced by mathematical.7 You see now that pass(#ing/#ed/#er/#able) ɑː – passenger a – passive a - passion a (all containing the same stem) preserve the original distinction (and distribution). There is no explanation as to why pass has not been influenced by passenger. This is a choice that this accent made at some point (a choice which may be reversed in the future). 
 Not everything can be explained so neatly. The words mass ‘holy service’ and Basque can have both a long and short vowel (= free variation). Words like lass, bass ‘perch’, ass ‘donkey’, lash have short vowels, while ass ‘backside’ usually has a long vowel, as does moustache. The same is true for words in which the fricative was followed by a consonant: ask, task, mask, cask, rascal have long vowels, mascot, asp, Bafta have short ones.  One possible explanation is that these words were 
‘reborrowed’ from those accents in which the BATH-lengthening never happened (the non-SouthEastern accents). Bafta, of course, is too modern a word to be reborrowed. Here we must conclude that the rule of BATH-lengthening is dead as a rule, it ran its course and is no longer active. New words (of any source) are no likely to be affected. 
