
2 	What can be compared? 
2.1 Types of approaches to data in linguistics 
In one word, anything can be compared along a chosen axis: syntactic features of language A with syntactic feature of language B; semantic changes can be compared; phonological processes can also be compared (diphthongisation, monophthongisation, weakening of consonants, vowel reduction, etc.). The subject of comparison gives a perspective and helps to organise linguistic material into occurring, rare or impossible patterns. Let us see some of these approaches. 
 Typological linguistics usually analyses syntactic and morphological similarities. For example, it looks at whether languages have prepositions (like English, French, Croatian: e.g., in the school, sur la maison ‘on the house’, u kutiji ‘in the box’) or postpositions (like Hungarian: iskolában, házon, dobozban). It may also look at how morphological material is organised with respect to the base of the word: some languages have long complex words built up of a sequence of affixes centred around a syntactically independent semantic core and are thus word-based, like Hungarian, Finnish or Turkish: 
e.g., HU megmérettetéseidben ‘in your (singular) allowing yourself to be tested for what you can do (plural)’ with the ultimate stem mér ‘measure, test’, which is also an independently occurring word.1 Some languages are stem-based (affixes are added to a syntactically non-independent core, as it is done in Latin, Greek or the Slavonic languages. For example, the stem behind the word for earth in Latin terra is terr-, something which can never be found on its own/in isolation (that’s why you will find a hyphen after such data): terr- is thus abstracted away from terra, terrae, terrā, terram, terrarium, terras and the rest of the shapes that this stem can take on. Hungarian and Latin thus belong to two different types of languages as far as morpheme independence is concerned. Both Hungarian and Latin, however, are referred to as synthetic languages (they synthesise a number of morphemes into long words). They contrast sharply with Chinese, which is an analytic language where there is little or no inflection (so there are no complex/synthetically inflected words). No language is perfect from any perspective, of course: Hungarian has bound stems (in játék ‘toy’ and játszik ‘to play’ there is a bound stem ját-), and Chinese has compound words (and thus its derivational morphology is not analytic). English is more analytic than Hungarian, but its inflection still shows signs of synthesising (boys boy+Plural is still a synthetically formed word, just like begs beg+3 person+singular+present+indicative). The derivational morphology of English can still be argued to be heavily synthetic. 
      It may also analyse how passivisation is executed: morphologically, syntactically or lexically. Of course, no language will ever be a perfect example of just one type of process. Languages will always be scattered on a cline of features. Hungarian, for example, can express the logico-semantic concept of possibility by either using a suffix (e.g. tanul-hat ‘can study’, literally study-can) or a syntactically independent word/auxiliary (tud tanulni or bír tanulni), similarly to English (can study), although the  two languages are generally taken to belong to two different morphological types of languages. Note that in a typological analysis any language can be compared with any other. 
 As is well-known, languages may develop similar features because they are spoken in close proximity to each other and speakers have a chance of mixing through marriage, trade, shared pastures, etc. Areal linguistics looks at how features may spread from one to language to the other. It is generally claimed that Hungarian has developed a complex system of verbal prefixation through extended contact with languages such as German and Russian (e.g., csinálni ‘to do’ vs meg-csinálni ‘to have done it’, kicsinálni ‘to have aggravated somebody’, be-csinálni ‘to have been scared stiff’, fel-csinálni ‘to have put her up the duff’, etc.). We are not saying here that the verbal prefixes meg- or le- are of German or Russian origin, of course. The lexical material is Hungarian, the principle is non-Hungarian originally (= express perfectivity with prefixes, not with auxiliaries or different tenses). Some claim that bilingual speakers are the key in understanding these similarities because it’s only through such speakers that aspects of any language can be internalised in another. This aspect of language contact can be observed at any level (phonology, morphology, syntax, and probably most visibly in the lexicon, etc.). 
Hungarian may have developed the use of prefixes to cover an area for what it originally used 
different tenses, but it doesn’t mean that its use of prefixes (or their distribution) will be identical to that in German or the Slavonic languages. In Hungarian prefixes are usually very mobile (they can appear separated from the verb to which they attach: meg fogja ő ezt még biztos csinálni ‘he will still do this surely’ where meg- has been separated from its verbal host csinál over a long stretch of words). This mobility is unheard of in Croatian and Serbian, for example, some of those languages from where perfective prefixation may have spread into Hungarian: Uraditi će on to još sigurno ‘he will still do this surely’ where the prefix u- always stays glued to its verbal host raditi ‘do’ irrespectively of the syntactic environment. 
