
6 Long vowels
We do not intend to take a firm stand on the status of long vowels in this paper. The following observations seem to be worth pointing out though.

In accent D (New Zealand Acrolect) flapping occurs between two vowels only if the first vowel is short: it occurs neither after diphthongs (eg mitre *májɾə), nor after long vowels (eg martyr *máːɾə). We have argued that the absence of flapping after diphthongs is explainable if diphthongs are taken to be VC sequences, ie if a t is not in intervocalic position after a diphthongal offglide. If flapping also fails to occur after a long vowel then one may think this is also because such a consonant is not between two vowels, ie a long vowel is also a vowel followed by a consonant.

The absurdity of this claim is lessened by two considerations: (i) most long vowels of current British English are the result of compensatory lengthening accompanying the loss of an earlier r (eg fort foːt) or h (eg fought foːt), (ii) these two consonants and the length mark, ː, are in complementary distribution.

However, we do not need to assume that current British English foːt is in fact fort or foht, it is enough to postulate that the second part of a long vowel is associated to a consonantal position in the skeleton, assuming an autosegmental representation. Thus the representation of oː in English would not be that shown in (20a), but that shown in (20b).

(20)
a.	V  V		b.	V  C
	| /			| /
	o			o	
In other words, a long vowel is not a “branching nucleus”, but a nucleus followed by a “coda”. This explains the lack of flapping in accent D.

We will use the symbol h to represent the vowel associated with a consonantal position. Note that this is the standard practice in the case of prevocalic “h”: the symbol h represents a sound that is phonetically a vowel, but phonologically a consonant in transcriptions like hit, hen, hat, etc. Thus oh is used to transcribe a long vowel which is linked to both a vocalic and a following consonantal position. The second part of this entity is also phonetically a vowel, phonologically a consonant.
