
1.2 What can history teach us? 
As it turns out, everything is part of a larger structure, and as such has a history as well. You may have wondered why the human respiratory system is as imperfect as it is (note that this is not a scientific statement, but a human sentiment). Our lungs are only capable of performing a bi-tidal respiratory function. This means that we can at any one time either inhale or exhale, but not both, and the lungs can never be totally emptied of the inhaled air. This is similar to the movement of the seas: we either have an outgoing tide or an incoming tide but not both. Birds, in contrast, have a different take on the problem: their bodies have a system of interconnected airsacks in addition to lungs, which ensures that air can both exit and enter their bodies at the same time through different channels (their nostrils and mouths). This anatomical trait ensures that they have all the energy required for prolonged flying, which is both energy- and oxygen-consuming. 
 But why are our lungs as they are? From a structural anatomical point of view little can be said about this, apart from describing this and drawing conclusions from this for the whole of the system (we may now understand why humans get tired very easily performing physically demanding exercises: the blood simply can’t draw enough oxygen from the lungs, which as we see now can only work unidirectionally, first inhaling then exhaling thus losing precious time in drawing further supplies of air). But this is where a structural analysis stops.  
      But what can we say about this anatomical ‘flaw’ from a historical point of view? If we examine fish we will see that fish have an air bladder that can be filled with oxygen from the blood, but this air bladder is part of the fish’s digestive system. Human lungs, evolutionary biologists think, developed out of this air bladder of a distant ancestor, a bud on our digestive system. So, historically our lungs are closely associated with our stomachs, which explains why the air can only be inhaled and exhaled in one direction (air is basically food and food is normally only transported in one direction, away from the mouth into the stomach). As you can see, exhaling air can now be viewed as an evolutionary innovation (inhalation, just like passing food down our gullets, is older historically/evolutionary). 
      You may wonder which aspect of our analysis is more worth pursuing: the historical or the structural? There is no answer to this, both enrich in their own ways our understanding of our respiratory system. Which one you chose or prefer is down to you (this is a personal choice, not one based on scientific evaluation and as such cannot be discussed objectively). 
