
5.2 Stress patterns
There is some reason to believe that the location of word stress in English can be calculated from segmental patterns.

Analysing diphthongs as VC (as opposed to VV) sequences influences stress-calculating algorithms in three cases. Firstly, in verbs final VV and VC is distinguished: the former is stressed, the latter is not (eg agree əgríj vs habit hábit. In fact, this distinction was not clear even in the time of its statement: word-final “long U” had to be listed as an exception (as in argue áːgjuw, continue kəntínjuw). In current English ij and əw also occur in final position in verbs without “attracting” stress (eg carry kárij, follow fóləw). Furthermore, there are VC-final verbs whose final syllable is stressed (eg omit əmít, rebel rəbél). Verbs that end in a diphthong followed by a consonant are stressed on their last syllable exactly like verbs that end in two consonants, so it makes no difference in this case if diphthongs are analysed as VC: both ferment fəmént and cremate krəméjt are stressed on their ult.

Secondly, Chomsky & Halle (1968: 72, 78) claim that a “long vowel” in the last syllable of a word is always stressed. Thus, although polysyllabic nouns are not usually stressed on their ult — which is extrametrical, says Hayes (1982) —, they are when this syllable contains a long vowel: cf arcade aːkéjd vs stipend stájpend. Burzio shows that “there is […] no reason to suppose that long vowels in final syllables are always stressed” (1994: 48–52). The “diphthong” in arcade is stressed like the VCC sequence in defence dəféns and the VCC sequence in stipend is unstressed like the “diphthong” (or, as claimed here, VCC sequence) in decade dékejd.

Thirdly, nouns and adjectives seem to distinguish VV$ and V$C in their penult: a “diphthong” is tautosyllabic, hence it attracts stress, but a vowel followed by a heterosyllabic consonant does not. Since both parts of a diphthong belong to the penult, but a single consonant belongs to the last syllable here, the penult is light in the latter case: cf European jóːrəpíjən vs regimen réʤimən. If the ij in European were a VC sequence, one might argue, then onset maximization would syllabify the j into the last syllable, therefore the CV structure of the last two syllables of these two words would be the same (ijən and imən). Note, however, that there are plenty of words that have the same sequence in their last two syllables, but are stressed on their antepenult (eg Cyclopean sajklə́wpijən, scorpion skóːpijən), what’s more other words that have the latter sequence are stressed on their penult (eg persimmon pəsímən).

We may conclude that “stress rules” cannot be used convincingly to argue for analysing diphthongs either as “long vowels” or as VC sequences.
