Variation in time and space in languages 
1. Structure versus history 
1.1 Introduction 
Knowledge of the structure of a language is quite different from knowing its history, knowing where it came from (more specifically, what the origins are of its phonological system, phonotactic rules, syntax, semantics, you name it). Structure and history (or origin, if you like) can be studied independently, and rightly so because different points of view can shed light on an entity from quite different (and surprising) angles. This means no entity will ever have just the one interpretation. (If this were possible, this one interpretation would necessarily have to be the only right one.) This course has hopefully manged to dispel this idea: no interpretation is ever the only possible (and right) one. So, rest assured neither the structural nor the historical aspect is better than the other. They are complementary, one trying to describe what the other can’t or won’t access.  
      Up to now, very little has been said about the history of phonemes, sounds, intonational contours, etc. (or about whether such historical accounts are possible at all given the time factor and the fact that the footprints of a language used to be largely confined to the written, rather than the spoken, medium and as such offer no insight into what something may have sounded like). What’s more, this problem is compounded by the fact that what comes down to us from the past was usually recorded (composed) by rich literate men (or clergymen who were again men), rather than (rich) literate women or illiterate poor (wo)men. 
 It seems a natural necessity of all existing things to change, not for better or for worse, change happens for no obvious (or no psychologically, humanly understandable) reason. It simply seems that changes are part of a complex web that is still too complex for us to comprehend. This doesn’t mean that one shouldn’t approach change, it only means that no judgements should be passed on any one stage (of any structure of any language) being better or surpassing any other stage (of any language). This is why sciences are impartial, seemingly cold and aloof, but objective, non-judgemental and non-personal (pretty much like a Buddhist’s view on the order of things). Think of biology or physics, for example: physics will never claim that a supernova is at a more advanced level than a red giant, nor will biology pass any judgements on the anatomy of a cockroach (as opposed to a swan, a willow warbler or a dolphin). Such statements would simply be laughable. The same principle holds in linguistics: we will observe, compare, analyse, establish orders of precedence of rules, but will never have anything to say about why something is better or worse than anything else we observe, because such statements are nonsensical in sciences. 
