2 Analyzing laryngeal contrasts1 
2.1 Background to laryngeal properties and phenomena 
Consonants can be characterized along three dimensions: place of articulation (referring to where the air passing through the vocal tract during the articulation of the consonant is blocked), manner of articulation (describing the degree of the obstruction) and laryngeal property (the quality of the consonant determined by the states of the vocal folds in the larynx)—see the table in (1).2 
 
(1) 
 
About half of the world’s languages contrast two series of obstruents differing in their laryngeal properties, e.g., [p] and [b]. This “voiced–voiceless” contrast can be observed in both Hungarian and English, for example, as indicated by minimal pairs like Hun. /b/ál ‘ball’ – /p/ál ‘Paul’ and Eng. /b/all – /p/aul. Although we can use the terms “voiced” and “voiceless” to identify the two types of obstruent in both languages, we must be aware that the phonetic, i.e., physical, realizations of this opposition are different—contrary to what the orthographic conventions suggest. 
      As an illustration, you can see in (2) the waveforms of four sound recordings in which a Hungarian and an English native speaker pronounce the abovementioned minimal pairs. Under the waveforms, you can find the spectrograms of the four recordings, in which the darker areas indicate the dominant frequencies of the given sounds (between 0 and 5,000 Hz) and their change over time. Without going into too much detail about it, let us compare the laryngeal properties of these word-initial plosives, separated from the rest of the word by vertical lines in the figures: The /b/ in Hun. bál is characterized by actual vocal fold vibration (i.e., voicing), which is indicated by the periodic waveform already in the closure phase of the plosive, and in the spectrogram, by a striated darker area in the low frequency range. If we compare the initial plosive of Hun. Pál with that of Eng. ball, it is clear that they can be pronounced identically: the closure phase is silent, and vocal fold vibration begins upon release in both cases, i.e., they are voiceless unaspirated. Finally, Eng. Paul also begins with a voiceless plosive; moreover, vocal fold vibration in the next vowel is delayed (by 105 milliseconds), i.e., the plosive is aspirated, which is realized as a [h] sound following the plosive: [ph]. In words like play, where the plosive is followed by a sonorant consonant (more precisely, an approximant/a nonnasal sonorant consonant), aspiration is manifested as the devoicing of the sonorant consonant: [pl̥]. 
