
(8) The Indo-European language family 
 
3 	Language vs dialect 
The previous section has shown that in a historical analysis if you can set up phonological rules that trace the route a sound takes (in all the words in which it occurs in the same environment) through time allows you to say English and German are dialects of a now extinct language (West-Germanic). So, are English and German not languages, but rather dialects? The answer depends on your point of view. For a historical linguist a language is virtually the same as a dialect (of a now extinct dialect, which in turn may be the dialect of yet another extinct dialect, and so on ad infinitum). If you want to stick to the distinction between language and dialect, that distinction will mainly have to be established on a nonlinguistic basis. The basis will be routed in a social, cultural, military, naval or any other supremacy difference between the entities of which you want to elevate one to the status of an (official) language.  
      In Germany, for example, there are several dialects (all with their own rules of grammar, including pronunciation), but there is southern German (centred originally around Bavaria), which used to be just another dialect until it was given official language status in the 19th century. This was done for practical reasons: a huge, unified country had to be run efficiently with a system of border-to-border law-making, effective administration, etc. Max Weinreich, a Yiddish scholar, said that “a language is a dialect with an army and a navy,” expressing very succinctly the fact how linguistically arbitrary this classification is (and how non-arbitrary it is from a power-based point of view). Once a country gains independence and/or takes power into its own hands, a language is suddenly born (Czech and Slovak are now popularly regarded to be two different languages, as are Serbian and Croatian, but for a historical linguist they are just dialects of an extinct language/dialect).  We must conclude that the difference between language and dialect is mainly political. 
      Yet, we have practical reasons to introduce another term, accent. It is used to describe dialects (languages) that have very similar (or identical) grammars and mainly differ in pronunciation, as is the case with Southern Standard British English (SSBE), General American (GA), South American English, and so on. As you can see English and German, or English and Russian are not referred to as two accents of the same language, because the differences (both phonological and non-phonological) are just too substantial for them to be regarded as the ‘same language’. SSBE and GA, however, can be referred to as accents of the same (rather abstract) language we call English. There is no ‘one English’, there are only various accents of it, or various ‘Englishes’. For a historical linguist, of course, all the various Englishes can be shown to have developed from one common source with the application of (a rather long series of) phonological rules (or at least this is how it can be envisaged linguistically). All Englishes are historically related to each other though through common origin, leading back to West Germanic. 
      We have worked our way through a substantial amount of information to realise that change has always been a central notion in the description of languages. The languages we see today are full of changes happening just now, which means that we are witnesses to how new accents (and given considerable time, even dialects; and given even more time and space, languages) may develop. What we see today as variations existing among the speakers of the various Englishes may one day become a differentiating feature (as is the case with R-loss which can be used for the differentiation between rhotic and non-rhotic accent, discussed later). This comes as no surprise because there are no two instances of the same word said in the same manner (just observe how your own pronunciation varies from moment to moment in your own language, or English for that matter). Some changes are minor, some may appear more substantial. The question of which of these changes will ultimately become a differentiating feature of one accent as opposed to another is anyone’s guess. Linguistics can predict which direction a change may take based on what we have observed in the world’s languages, but whether it really will go down a certain path cannot be predicted with certainty. Some changes will become entrenched in one language but not in another, and so on. But as you can see, languages do change (as all things generally do), are changing at the moment, and have changed in the past as well (just read our discussion on English and German and the rest of the Indo-European languages). 
3.1 How can you picture an ongoing change? 
It may appear simplified but just imagine someone throws a pebble into the peaceful mirror of a lake. Ripples on the surface will appear and will spread for a certain stretch of the water and then disappear just as suddenly as they appeared (see (9)). 
(9) Ripples of change on the surface of a lake 
 