
8 For those with a historical interest in GA. The vowel mergers discussed above didn’t happen in one fell swoop. There were a number of rounds of mergers. In very conservative (possibly no longer existing) American English story, porridge and pot had three different vowels at one stage: story o, porridge ɔ and pot ɑ. It seems the merger first affected the tense vowel before onset R making story ɔ and porridge ɔ have identical lax vowels. The lax ‘o’ that was not followed by R lowered to ɑ (pot). In modern GA those lax ‘o’s that originate in historical lax ‘o’s can in some accents lower to ɑ (e.g., porridge, lorry, sorry with ɑ), but those that originate in the tense ‘o’ do not (e.g., story, notorious seem only to have ɔ, not ɑ). Perhaps this distinction is reinforced by spelling. The same distinction once existed in Mary e vs merry ɛ vs marry a. Today Mary and merry have a merged lax vowel (ɛ) in GA (but may still have the original distinction is some accents), and marry has either ɛ or a (in some accents of GA). The marry merry Mary merger is not yet complete, as you can see. However, compare this to mare, rare, fair which can only have ɛ (not the historical e). Coda R was a stronger cause of mergers than onset R. As you can see, all this variation on the same theme may be a point of difference for a number of American accents and may ultimately lead to new languages in the (very distant) future. 
Note also that word-final ɑ in GA which has an origin independent of the rhotic (law, spa) patterns with the tense vowels (it can be found word-finally, for example ), but there is another ɑ (the one originating in pre-R broadening, as in car, cart) which is found before the rhotic and patterns with the lax vowels (see (37a)). We have both a tense ɑ and a lax ɑ, it seems. Note also that a (as in pat) which cannot be found word-finally and as such patterns with the lax vowels, but it cannot be found before r where one would only expect lax vowels (given the overall laxing effect or the rhotic). This is a distributional curiosity that we will not discuss. 
5.3.3 	Southern Standard British English 
5.3.3.1 	Historical lax (short) vowels 
The next major accent on our list is SSBE (or more precisely CuBE). Let us see what vocalic contrasts can be found before r in this accent (38). 
