
(4) English (?) 
The pressure fluctuations in the ventricles are caused by constant changes in the cardiovascular system. 
As a matter of fact, it is not enough to know French (just to disappoint you if you thought that French will always be of help in deciphering English), you also have to know Latin and Greek. Of course, for a speaker of English this has no bearing on their knowledge of the language. A little bit of French or Latin has never resulted in any child not being able to master the language if it was exposed to it with the help of its environment. The example in (4) is English in its full glory (and not French or Latin or Greek). Areal linguistics will tell you that English has acquired (= ‘borrowed’) an immense amount of lexical items from a number of languages close by or further away (French being just one of these). The language has also acquired a substantial amount of words from Latin and Greek not through language contact but learned borrowing (with the help of sciences that looked to Latin or Greek for vocabulary). All this has shaped English into what we can observe today. As you can see, areal linguistics will be able to compare any language with any other provided it has had an impact on the language you analyse. As you can see, words themselves are no ground for claiming that English is a dialect of French (or alternatively that French is a dialect of English). 
 Similarly, Hungarian has not only acquired the means of expressing perfectivity with prefixes, but also an immense amount of words from its neighbours. Words like bakter ‘track watchman’, zsindely 
‘slat’, pintér ‘barrel maker’, zokni ‘sock’, puszi ‘kiss’, tót ‘Slovak’ (originally any Slavonic speaking 
 
people), partvis ‘brush with a long handle’, kókler ‘quack’, pléh ‘tin’, etc. are no proof in themselves that Hungarian is a dialect of German. Words like gomba ‘mushroom’, bagoly ‘owl’, szilva ‘plum’, gerencsér/gelencsér ‘potter’, gerenda ‘wooden beam’, tompa ‘blunt’, asztal ‘desk’, udvar ‘yard, court’, oláh ‘Wallachian’, olasz ‘Italian’ (originally Slavonic plural of Wallachian), lekvár ‘jam’ (originally healthy broth), német ‘German’, pad ‘table’, patak ‘stream’, szerencse ‘luck’, csoda ‘miracle’, galagonya ‘hawthorn’, zab ‘oat’, etc. do not prove that Hungarian is Slavonic either. Words like lízing 
‘lease’, csencsel ‘wheel deal’ (from change), csetel ‘chat’, prezi ‘presentation’, CD ‘CD’, streamelni ‘stream data’, klikk(elni) ‘click’, etc. are no proof that Hungarian is any closer to English than it is to Serbian or German, or Turkish (from where it also borrowed lexical items: e.g., kapu ‘gate’), or Latin from where it still continues to borrow words as part of learned borrowing (e.g., kardiovaszkuláris ‘cardiovascular’, pneumatikus ‘pneumatic’, pleurális ‘pleural’). 
