      
It is also possible that BATH-lengthening did not run its full course (= it did not affect all the eligible words of the lexicon). We will not investigate this here. Another very likely possibility is that some of these words are learned or recent borrowings, coming into the language after BATHlengthening had run its course (remember a similar example in connection with anthem). The rule, when it was active, and the processes of analogy and reborrowing that followed have resulted in an arbitrary (lexical) distribution of a/ɑː (= you have to remember which word in this particular category has which vowel). What used to be allophonic variation before voiceless fricatives is now a phonemic fact. We will see further examples for this as we proceed. 
 The term split may appear slightly misleading because although this is a split in the pronunciation of the original vowel, the path to the appropriate vowel in modern English is unpredictable at the present stage of the language. Split must be understood as phonemic (‘unexplained’) split. If you find a word which ends in -ast, -ask, -asp, the quality of the vowel is unpredictable (it has to be remembered; it is a lexical matter of the word in question). Note, however, the following: while phonological analogy may have replaced a long vowel (ɑː) with a short one (a) in words having a voiceless fricative in constant coda position (clasp ɑː vs asp a) or in words in which the voiceless fricative was either in onset or in coda position in the same morpheme depending on alternation (mass 
‘weight’ now with a short vowel, influenced by massive where the vowel was always short, as opposed to pass, which kept the long vowel), the long vowel has not been analogically extended to alternants with the fricative in onset position (passive and massive with a, but never ɑː).  
      Words that have either never had a fricative in coda position (hat, map, lag have never had a long vowel and they have been kept that way) are really our control group where nothing interesting happens. There is thus order in analogical madness: the long vowel has thus not been extended to words in which the voiceless fricative has always been in onset: passive, passion, mathematical have never been recorded with ɑː. Of course, for words that exemplified no alternations (e.g., cassock, lacerate) we have no reason to suppose that a long vowel could ever have spread to them. You can see that words with fricatives in constant onset position (cassock) are identical in behaviour to alternants with fricatives in onset position (passive) that have a ‘pair’ with a fricative in coda position (pass). Cassock and passive are equally stable. It is words with fricatives in constant coda position that are unstable and where we can observe the effects of the BATH-split (see summary in (21)). 
