
5.1 The positions of R 
In what follows we will be using R to refer to an R which is historical, i.e., which was present in the language from at least Middle English times. This R may have undergone deletion (in non-rhotic accents), but is still present in rhotic accents. As you know by now, English spelling is very conservative and preserves such (now non-existent) R’s (e.g., art). Some of these R’s are non-recoverable (e.g., art), but word-final R’s are recoverable (e.g., This car is automatic). Of course, in rhotic accents every historical R is still present. Let us first look at the environments where R can be found today. We will be referring to pronounced rhotics as r (this may be a historical or linking R in non-rhotic accents, but may also be intrusive r, a rhotic that was inserted into words at some point after Middle English). Let’s look at (22) now. 
(22) Environments of r 
 
If you analyse (22) you will see that the only position where r is stable is the word-initial position (either before a stressed vowel (V) or an unstressed vowel (v)). Note also that semi-rhotic accents (like EastCoast/New England old-fashioned American) show that the word-final position is stronger than wordinternal coda position: in the former r can still be found (tar), but not in the latter (art). It seems we also have a hierarchy of strength for r-deletion: if r is lost word-internally before an unstressed vowel (era), it means it will be lost in all the other positions as well, and so on, according to the strength hierarchy of positions: rat > era > tar > art.  It also follows that we don’t expect to find accents in which the r is retained in art, but not in tar. 
      In SSBE r must be followed by either a vowel or a syllabic consonant to be pronounced (see the Chapter on syllables in this course). In the history of SSBE there occurred a change that deleted wordfinal pre-pausal r (This is made of tar) and pre-consonantal r (I like art). This seems a rather straightforward process, you would think. It is and it isn’t because the loss of the rhotic is bound up with at least two other processes, Broadening and Breaking. Before we go any further, we must ask whether word-final R in SSBE is historical (or linking) R or intrusive r. 
5.2 Linking R or r? 
Before we go any further, we must ask whether word-final R in SSBE is historical (or linking) R or intrusive r. The apparently obvious answer is that it is R, that is a historical R, which has been around from Middle English times. This R is, it seems, a r which has never been deleted because it was shielded off from deletion by the vowel-initial word after it (see (22)). 
(22) R or r? 
 