
1.3 Do languages have a structural and a historical aspect to their analysis? 
The answer has to be in the affirmative. Analysing a language can happen at two independent, but complementary levels. One deals with structure: the system of contrastive building blocks (features like voice, nasality, place of articulation, manner of articulation), phonemes, contrasts, syllables (and whether they exist), stress (and whether any generalisations can be drawn on them based on the various patterns we encounter), intonation (and whether the various contours can be used contrastively and how this can be described). This approach you have been engrossed in up to now is synchronic linguistics (ancient Greek syn- ‘together, next to’ and chron- ‘time’, referring to units of analysis present at the same level of reference/slice of time, say 19th century English, or contemporary South African English), on a par with anatomy (no questions asked about where our lungs come from, only their function can be inspected and how they fit into the larger unit that we call the organism). This approach may have its limitations, but then the synchronic approach can never be aware of its own shortcomings because it doesn’t have the means to assess its own limitations. You are now aware why we say that ɛj (as in pane) and ɛː (as in pair) are two phonemes of this language, but you don’t know anything about whether this has always been the case or not. This is not a problem, you may not want to consider this a problem, or you may have other reasons to dismiss history, the fact remains that all analysts doing synchronic linguistics have to live with absence of history in a synchronic analysis. 
 The complementary approach is called diachronic linguistics (Greek dia- ‘across’ and chron- ‘time’), referring to a point of view when items are inspected as they developed from each other, not as they coexisted with other units of analysis at the respective point of reference/slice of time. Historical linguistics will tell you after some deliberation that (some instances of) ɛː derive from ɛj, so ɛː is an innovation. If you dig deeper you will realise that even ɛj is an innovation, deriving from eː. Dig deeper still and you will see that (some instances of) eː derive from aː (pane having originally been paːn). And who knows what further linguistic excavations will produce. Similar chains of developments can be established for the rest of the phonemes of the language. This is a mental exercise which requires considerable expertise and knowledge of the past stages of English, languages in general, spelling conventions of the past (and their limitations), comparison of languages (English with German, English with French or any other combination), comparison of dialects (and accents) of English (SSBE with GA, Scottish Standard English or any other variety for that matter). The analysis ultimately produces a complex network of chains of developments (see (1) below which only contains one part of a more extensive summary) with instances of mergers and splits (to be explained later)). Don’t concern yourself with this now, it is only for demonstration (this is mainly for those who study the history of English and are quite advanced at it). 
