
 
7.7.2.3. The low-rising tone 
Form 
The voice rises from low to mid. If there is a tail, its syllables continue at mid-height. Examples in diagrammatic notation: 
 	 	———— 	 	—————  	——————————————— 
 	 	———— 
 
—————  
——————————————— 
 	 	Blue.  
.
 
She knows.  
.
We could ′ask them ′over for coffee. 
f
 	
 
The low rise does not indicate a question, as opposed to the high rise, which does. Compare these two pronunciations of Really?: 
 	 Really?  LOW RISE (just a polite way of saying “I see” or “I heard what you said”) 
 
  Really?  HIGH RISE (a true question asking for confirmation of something surprising) These two tone-units are a prosodic minimal pair, whose meaning difference is expressed by the intonation difference. Tthe low rise is not an “allo-“ form of the high rise but a distinct “intonation phoneme”, an independent tone of English. 
 
Function 
The low rise is mostly used in response to what someone else has said. It expresses the following meanings or attitudes: 
(a) Indifference. “What I’m saying is true but I don’t think it’s important or interesting or relevant.” It sounds as if the speaker was shrugging while saying these sentences.  (What’s your favourite colour?) — Blue. (What a childish question.) 
.
 	(I suppose you don’t dare to tell your wife.) — She knows. (It makes no difference.) 
.
 	(Did you enjoy the performance?) — It was all right. (Nothing special.) 
.
(b) Encouragement. The low rise is used to encourage or comfort the hearer and to sound reassuring. It sounds as if the speaker meant, “no problem, nothing serious, relax”.  Encouragement to do something, not to worry, etc. Often used to children. 
 	′Don’t worry. 	 	I ′don’t mind. 	We ′shouldn’t be a fraid. 
						
 Encouragement to continue speaking (“I’m listening, go on!”): 
 	Yes. 	 	Is ′that so? 	 	′That’s interesting.  	No. (but tell me) 
								
It is also used with the polite tag ...will/won’t you?, attached to imperatives. The imperative base sentence has a falling tone: 
 	Help your self, | won’t you? 	 
 
(c) Greetings, thanks, apologies. 
Come and lend a Chand, | will you? 
 
 	′Good morning.  	′No thanks.  
				
 	′Bye- bye. 
.
 	I’m sorry. 	 	Ex cuse me.  
				
 	′See you soon. 
.
To sum up: the low rise is mostly a response, something added to other sentences. It can express indifference and lack of importance. Due to its “lightness” it can also be used to express encouragement and greetings. It is not used for questions. 
