      
This leaves us with dust, which is difficult to explain because the word is a lexical word (and as such is not expected to lose vowel length) and the st cluster is coronal, so a long vowel should be allowed here. We have seen in this course, however, that sC clusters are unpredictable (you may remember that it is a lexical property of any given word how a sC is syllabified: Nebraska is Nebrás$ka, but órchestra is órche$stra as shown by stress assignment, see Chapter on stress). We have to conclude that the same applies to the length of vowels before st clusters: the vowel is either long or short; in dust it happens to be short today, although it could be long as well; there is no phonotactic restriction on the length of the vowel). Note that in Old English the vowel was indeed long (dūst), as expected, showing that dust was re-lexicalised with a short vowel after Old English. After all, there is nothing phonologically at odds with a long vowel (or diphthong) before a coronal sC-cluster (oust, post, Geist, etc.). 
      There are other observations as well: German lost θ and has now . This is true for every German word, as every θ was regularly displaced by  (cf. think, as opposed to denken; that, as opposed to das, etc.). Note also that German has no mb clusters: it has <mm> m now. This is true for every historical *mb in German (compare En lamb to G Lamm going back to *lamb-, comb to G Kamm going back to *kamb-; timber to G Zimmer ‘room’). Note that an asterisk (*) shows reconstructed data in historical linguistics, NOT ungrammatical data. Double asterisks (**) show ungrammatical data. 
      A few important questions must be asked and answered. Which language is more conservative, i.e. closer to the original state of affairs? It is German, but why? Why can’t we say that German decided to insert nasals before its fricatives at some point? Because in historical linguistics inserting something is ‘more expensive’ than deleting something, meaning that every insertion must be very carefully weighed (= motivated/explained) against the conditioning environment. There is nothing that motivates the insertion of nasal before fricatives. There are hundreds of words where there is no nasal before the fricative (schaffen ‘make’, **schamfen, lesen ‘read’, **lensen, etc.). There also are words with a fricative in this position (uns ‘use’, fünf, Kunst ‘art’, etc.). It seems that German has no problems with nasals before fricatives. Deletion of the nasals in English has been motivated as the loss of a noncontinuant nasal before a continuant fricative, which seems to be a natural and recurrent process in other languages as well (in Hungarian, n is lost before all continuants, including the fricatives: honfi ‘patriot’ with a long, nasalised vowel ɔː̃ .  
      There is an important consequence of this analysis. If the loss of nasals before fricatives is what characterises English, and if rules are understood as they should; that is, as rules applying to all possible inputs at a given time, there should be no nasals before fricatives in English at all. This is not borne out by the data: nymph, lymph, anthem, Kensington, pansy, lens, and the list continues. Is this the end of our analysis? Fortunately, this is not the case. We must conclude that rules (or rather their lifecycles) are fickle: they appear and they disappear for no obvious reason. Everything is born, it lasts for a limited time and then dies. The same applies to rules. The nasal loss rule above operated a long time ago (over almost 1500 years ago). We must conclude that all those words that we gave as counterexamples are not a problem, because they arrived (well) after the nasal loss rule had run its course. Historical linguistics is replete with such cases: words surviving rules not because they were stronger in any imaginable way than the rules but because they arrived (= were borrowed) later than the rule(s) for which they are supposed counterexamples. 
