
 The picture is quite convoluted, as you can see. Linguistics also claims that English and German are genetically related, that is at some ‘deep’ level they are more closely related (= similar) to each other than English and French are (despite the casual remark that these two share a substantial amount of their lexical items and must thus be related). This is because English and German are Germanic languages. French is similar to Italian, Spanish, Catalan or Rumanian (and the rest of the Romance languages). It is also common knowledge in linguistic circles that the Romance and the Germanic languages are also similar to each other (at an even ‘deeper’ level), and so on and so forth until the final circle of comparison is made to the effect that English and French and Latin and Greek and Sanskrit and Russian and Persian (Farsi) and Armenian and Albanian (and a fair deal of others) are all more similar to each other than they are to any other language outside this circle (like Hungarian, Finnish, Turkish, Basque or Chinese). What we have now done is give an insight into what perspectives comparing languages from a genealogical perspective may open up. This is the territory of historical (or diachronic) linguistics. From what we have said so far it should be obvious that perceived similarities between words themselves are no guarantee that any two languages will be more closely related to each other than they are to any other where the casual observer sees no similarities. Claiming that Hungarian and English are ‘genetically’ related because of the similarities in words is simply missing the point big time. 
 Diachronic linguistics is not commonly referred to as genealogical linguistics because strictly speaking it does not deal with genes (genes being the repositories of inherited information from a biological perspective). Languages are above and beyond genes in the traditional biological sense, so any child with any genetic (racial) background can learn any language whatsoever (a Caucasoid learns Russian just as easily as an Australoid). It also seems that any child with any genetic makeup can acquire any number of unrelated languages making them a bilingual or a multilingual child. From what we have said it follows that, in a diachronic analysis, languages cannot just be analysed indiscriminately (a typological or areal analysis allows for any two languages to be compared at any level (syntactic, morphological, lexical), as shown above). It would appear that relatedness between languages is more than skin deep, but how can it be accessed if it is difficult to spot and interpret? And even more importantly is it syntax or morphology or phonology perhaps that opens up a window on this level of relatedness?3  
2.2 The language ‘gene’ as understood in diachronic linguistics 
Based on our short discussion in 2.1 morphology and syntax are not reliable indicators of relatedness either. Hungarian has verbal prefixes, but it is unrelated to German or Russian. English uses auxiliaries just like Hungarian (he can study = ő tud tanulni), but this doesn’t place it in the group of languages from which Hungarian comes down, and so on. 
 The basis for any diachronic analysis as it has been understood for more than 200 years now is phonology. We have concluded, however, that words themselves offer no indication of relatedness. We have to modify this to the following effect: where superficial phonetic similarities end there may begin a diachronic phonological analysis. It is not words that are relevant for a historical analysis, but the relationship (and the relative temporal depth) between phonological changes affecting such words. 
Hungarian csetel ‘chat’ and English chat is ‘boring’ diachronically and superficial and as such is no proof for these two being related. Observe the following examples (5). 
 